Low let's talk about implementing the factory method design pattern.
The first one we're going to talk about is really three ways to implement the pattern.
First we're gonna talk about this abstract creator type of implementation.
This is really the strictest implementation of the pattern the way that it's implemented is the creator
class is an abstract class member the creator creates the actual instance the creator class implements
the factory method what happens here is you create a subclass of the Creator class for each product
type which contains an implementation of the factory method.
Each product type will be the instance that you want to create.
And so there may be many in the product is usually hidden behind an interface as well to use the factory
method creating objects you simply specify an instance of that type of the type of product and invoke
the factory method.
So be very clear the subclass itself contains the factory method the disadvantage of this approach is
that every new product has to subclass the creator class and implement its factory method.
And when I show you the two other approaches you'll see how this is a disadvantage.
You just have a lot of factory methods and you have a lot of subclasses but this is the strictest implementation
of the pattern.
This is really the strictest definition of the class diagram that I showed you earlier which is this
creator factory method create an interface you have all these other concrete methods that implement
the factory method and then you have a bunch of products that have a bunch of different crop Concrete
Products and remove the product interface.
The concrete creator the client will use the concrete creator pass creating an instance of whatever
concrete creator needs created and then calling the factory method on that so here in this most strict
implementation the product is the interface for the type of object that the factory method creates.
See object that gets created the creator is the interface that defines the factory method.
Any other methods implemented here are written on top rate on products produced by the factory method.
So you can have different methods if you want in this interface.
They're just kind of helper methods or things that you perform on the product that's actually created
the creator classes are and without knowledge of the actual products that will be created.
You don't have to know what actual products are created you just implement that factory method and you
create a new instance based on the concrete creator instance clients will need to subclass their creator
class to make particular concrete product only subclasses actually implement the factory method and
create the products again mention that the actual products will be created it is decided purely by the
choice of the subclass that's used.
So what has going to happen is the clients are going to create a new instance of the concrete creator
and that will know what product to create based on that concrete creator.
For instance let's take a look at an example in intelligence that will identify exactly what I'm talking
about
spring up ontology and I'm going to create a simple project that will be named what it will be named
abstract creator factory implementation abstract creator keep everything by default.
Factory example abstract creator how about factory abstract creator example abstract creator.
Example.
Because going to multiple examples with different kinds of implementation a little bit of information
on the application that we're going to demonstrate here is we're gonna create a shape hierarchy a factory
method so that it can create different types of shapes and what's going to happen is the product in
this case is going to be the interface for the type object that the factory method created.
The creator is going to be interface that defines the factory method.
We know that.
So the product in this case would be shape interface products or shape products will create a shape
interface and then concrete classes and implement the shape interface.
Those are the products we then get to create an abstract class name shape factory and subclasses that
extend the shape factor.
Those are the creators.
Each subclass will implement the factory method and then lastly we create our clients who will use a
subclass of the shape factory to create a specific shape object.
Let's start by creating our shape interface.
And this is just connecting one method we'll just say it's the draw method
boy draw.
We're then going to create a bunch of classes that implement the shape interface.
These are all products right.
So we'll create a rectangle class we'll create a square class and we'll create a circle.
So here is our rectangle class rectangle implements shape implements the draw method.
And again like most implementation in this classes it's not gonna contain any logic it's just going
to display some output.
So here we're just saying inside our draw method.
The other two classes and implement this interface again are the square and the circle.
These are different types of shapes.
Again representing the product these are the instances that are going to be created.
So square implements shape and again draw just.
I'll put some hardcoded data and circle implements shape and just for sake of simplicity I'm putting
all these classes in the same file.
Now typically when you write Java code you put each class on a separate file but just to make things
more efficient I'm putting my novel in the same file again an interface shape and then three classes
and implement the interface.
Now we'll actually implement our factory and for this I'll create a new class we'll just say new Java
class we'll call this abstract shape factory
and this will contain the abstract shape factory interface.
It'll be an abstract class actually.
And it will contain the factory method.
So a public class abstract shape factory will have a protected abstract math 3 method because our factory
method because remember we're using classing here and it's going to return a shape which is a reference.
And she's going to call it factory method for clarity and then we're also gonna have a default behavior
method which is going to return the shape just makes it easier to return the actual instance.
So we'll just say return.
Factory method.
This will create the call the factory method.
Create the instance and return it.
You can have other methods here if you want wanted other helper methods or other methods specifically
for commonality of all sharp objects.
Now we need to create our subclasses for the abstract factory that implements the factory method.
This is going to be this is gonna be our rectangle factory our square factory inner circle factory.
We're just gonna implement the factory method by returning to new instance of particular concrete product.
So here our first one will be our rectangle.
We'll just put it in a default class.
It's going to extend the exact shape factory implement this abstract fear factory method just by returning
a new Rectangle.
Same is going to happen for the circle and square right.
So we'll just copy and paste and just return different types of objects but the specific factory return
a specific product.
All right we'll call it square factory
square factory and that is gonna return a new square
and our circle factory return in your circle.
Pretty straightforward but what you should notice in this strict implementation is that you need a subclass
for every single product to implement its own factory method.
So you end up creating a lot of subclasses.
We now need to create the client so say nuclear do Java class.
We'll just call a client.
This will contain the main method that actually creates use of the factory to create instances so we'll
add a main method.
And what happens here is we first need to create different types of products so either using the different
factory methods.
So if we want to get an object of circle and then called straw method we can use the circle factory.
All right.
So let's get an object of circle and we just can create a shape reference say shape 1 and we have to
create a new instance of the factory for the product that we want which would be circle factory
and what we want to do is call the get shape method which will return the instance because remember
we added that help her get shape which we'll call the factory method.
So the client here doesn't know anything about the factory method it just says get shape than on shape
one we can actually say shape one dot draw.
See that helps.
Now I can see the draw method and so we would do the same for other types of shapes.
If we want to get a lot.
An object of rectangle we would call the rectangle factory and we would call the draw method for that.
So let's do that.
So there we go.
We called Get shape on our rectangle factory.
We just have another syntax error we want to make sure we have the braces and there we go.
So that we'll call that that will create a new insta rectangle and call the drama.
And then we can also do it for our last factory.
So this is the most strict implementation and what you'll notice here is in the client you have to create
a new subclass instance for every single product and so in turn that means that all of your factory
methods have to be in a subclass rectangle factory square factory circle factory that's the most strictest
implementation and you'll notice that the factory method is hidden behind this gate shape so the client.
All it does is know about its shape.
So if we were to build and run this we want to make sure our class is abstract
and now we're gonna compilation how to fix couple errors related to make sure that those methods are
protected because they're in the abstract class.
So when we run this and what you see is output is each one of the correct instances methods gets invoked
right through polymorphism essentially.
So inside circle draw inside rectangle drawn inside squared drawer.
Again the client is using the factory to create an instance of a specific product which is the circle
using the subclass and also because its shape on it will call even though it's a reference through polymorphism.
It will call the right instance.
So it ends up calling for each abstract shoe factory.
The specific factory method which will return a specific product type and then the get shape is the
way that it calls it.
And then lastly when you call the draw method it actually just displays some output to verify that you're
actually creating the correct product.
So this is the most strict implementation of the factory method.
This idea of the subclasses and creating a subclass that implements every single factory method let's
look at one more example and then I'll take a look at the different ways you can implement the factory
using a single subclass and then also using a static method.
But let's look at one more example.
So want to go back to the slides at this point
so let's consider a framework for applications that can present multiple documents to the user to key
abstractions in this framework are the classes application which is the creator and document which is
the product both of these classes are abstract.
Just like in our example clients will have subclass them to realize their application specific implementations.
If we create a drawing application we'll define class as drawing application and drawing document those
will be the concrete classes of the creator in the product the creators responsible for managing the
documents they'll create them as required.
So the creator implements the factory method.
It only knows when a new document should be created not what kind of document to create.
Right.
That's the high level abstract class the framework must instantiate classes but it only knows about
abstract classes which it cannot instantiate the factory method pattern will capsule late the knowledge
of which document subclass to create and moves this knowledge out of the framework application subclasses
redefine the abstract create document operation on application to return the appropriate document subclass
well just like we did pretty much the exact same thing.
The creators and Ma example were shapes.
I'm sorry the products were shapes the creators were the factory methods abstract shape circle factory
or or shape factory or erect or sorry rectangle factory or or square factory.
Once an application subclasses instantiated it can then instantiate application specific documents without
knowing their class.
So we call it create document the factory method because it's responsible for manufacturing an object
can hide that behind a get method if you want like I did but you can also just call the factory method
directly and that's it.
This is the strict implementation of the factory method.
Let's look at a couple other implementations.